Partial application concept and concept exercise (#509)
exercism/elm: concepts/partial-application-composition/introduction.md

# Introduction

## Partial application

All functions in Elm are [curried][currying], which means that if you call a function without passing all of the arguments, it returns a new function.

The result of doing this is called [partial-application][partial-application] (you are not passing all the arugments to the function, but are partially applying some of them).

```elm

> add2 = add 2

Reviewer: we should add
```elm
add : Int -> Int -> Int
add a b = a + b
```

--> Int -> Int

eigth = add2 6
--> 8
```

Partial application always applies the arguments in order.

```elm
-- contains: String -> String -> Int
-- contains first second =
--> This function is in the standard library, and returns True if the second string contains the first one

containsCedd = contains "Cedd"
--> String -> Bool
--> (partial application always applies the arguments in order, so "Cedd" becomes the first argument to contains
--> This is a function that takes a string, and returns True if that string contains Cedd)

containsCedd "-Cedd-"
--> True
--> ("-Cedd-" ends up being the second argument to contains, and it does include "Cedd", the first argument)
```

## Pipe operator (`|>`)

> Saying `x |> f` is exactly the same as `f x`. A concrete example is `"5" |> String.toInt` is the same as `String.toInt "5"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Saying `x |> f` is exactly the same as `f x`. A concrete example is `"5" |> String.toInt` is the same as `String.toInt "5"`.
```

> This doesn't sound very useful, but it is called the [pipe operator][pipe-operator] because it lets you write “pipelined” code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This doesn't sound very useful at first, but it is called the [pipe operator][pipe-operator] because it lets you write “pipelined” code.
```

For example, say we have a sanitize function for turning user input into integers:

```elm
sanitize : String -> Maybe Int
sanitize input =
    String.toInt (String.trim input)
```

We can rewrite it like this:

```elm
sanitize : String -> Maybe Int
sanitize input =
    input
    |> String.trim
    |> String.toInt
```

This avoids the use of brackets, and shows the functions in the order that they are applied (first `String.trim`, then `String.toInt`), which aids readability.

There is also a [reverse pipe operator `(<|)`][reverse-pipe-operator].
Saying `x <| f` is exactly the same as `f x`.

> This doesn't look very useful at first glance, and is definitely not used as much as the pipe operator, but it still helps to avoid brackets in some situations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This doesn't look very useful at first glance either, and is definitely not used as much as the pipe operator, but it helps to avoid brackets in some situations.
```

## Function composition / point free style

> The [`(>>)`][forward-composition] operator creates a new function by composing two compatible functions together.
> It does this by taking the output from the first function and using this as the first argument to the second function.
> The created function will have the same parameters as the first function, and will return whatever the second function returns.
> The first function must return a type that the second function accepts as a parameter.

Reviewer: Should we add the types of the operator? It could help clarify, but it could also be more confusing? I'm giving it a shot, feel free to disregard.

```suggestion
The [`(>>)`][forward-composition] operator has the type `(a -> b) -> (b -> c) -> (a -> c)` and creates a function of type `a -> c`  by composing two compatible functions of type `a -> b `and `b -> c`.
It does this by taking the output (of type `b`) from the first function and using it as the first argument to the second function (which must be of the same type `b`).
The created function will take the same input (of type `a`) first function, and will return whatever `c` the second function returns.
```

A concrete example is `String.trim >> String.toInt`.
`String.trim` takes a string as its only parameter, so this is what the created function takes.

> `String.toInt` returns an `Int`, so this is what the created function returns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`String.toInt` returns a `Maybe Int`, so this is what the created function returns.
```
